These are the CL source files from Paul Graham's "On Lisp", Prentice-Hall
1994, ISBN:  0-13-030552-9.  I have somewhat arbitrarily divided it
into two files
 onlisp-util.lisp, covering Chapters 1-18
 onlisp-app, covering Chapters 19-25.

I have edited onlisp-util.lisp to address practical problems in
loading and running, e.g., put in a package and exported symbols,
removed duplicate definitions, etc. -- see the files for details.  A
bit of work has been done on onlisp-app, but less extensively, e.g.,
no elimination of duplicates.  With Paul Graham's permission, they are
now distributed under the GPL; see clocc/etc/GNU-GPL.

I have tested onlisp-util and it compiles and loads without any
errors/warnings/notes, etc. on Allegro CL 5.0.1 and CMUCL, the only two
CLs I have available.  Any other reports are welcome.
Onlisp-app compiles and loads with many warnings.

Below is the original header written by Paul Graham.  Note that most
of these concerns don't apply (at least to onlisp-util); I have
eliminated duplicate definitions, attempting to take only the best.
The alrec/atrec issue has been conditionalized, I'm not sure to what
affect.  The original varsym?  will be used unless the second file
onlisp-app is loaded.  Also, as stated above, the license is now GPL.

; The code in this file was mechanically extracted from the TeX
; source files of On Lisp.  Some operators are multiply defined,
; as they were in the book.  Usually this means just that you get
; an upwardly compatible version 2 of whatever it is.  Note, though,
; that if you load this whole file you get:
;  1. the cltl1 versions of alrec and atrec.
;  2. varsym? defined as needed by the Prolog compiler.  So if you
;     want to use e.g. match with variables that begin with question
;     marks, comment out the final definition of varsym?
; If you have questions or comments about this code, or you want
; something I didn't include, send mail to onlisp@das.harvard.edu.

; This code is copyright 1993 by Paul Graham, but anyone who wants
; to use the code in any nonprofit activity, or distribute free
; verbatim copies (including this notice), is encouraged to do so.


Liam Healy
liam@users.sourceforge.net
2000-04-07
updated 2000-06-06
