


                                Pictures
                                        
                              Release Notes

            Copyright (C) 1990, Texas Instruments Incorporated



GENERAL

        Pictures is a Common  Lisp system for  object-oriented graphics,
        using the  X  Window  System.   Pictures  is  a  portable system
        written in Common  Lisp and  based on  other standard interfaces
        such as CLX, CLUE, and CLOS.

        Pictures defines a  set of  classes that  represent hierarchical
        structures of 2D graphical primitives.  Graphical structures can
        be composed, transformed, modified, and  saved to a file  by the
        application program.   Pictures  also  defines  a  class of CLUE
        contacts called "views," which allow graphical structures to  be
        displayed, manipulated, and edited interactively.

        This implementation of Pictures is available to the public at no
        charge.   Anyone  interested   may  receive   source  code   and
        documentation  via  anonymous  ftp  from  CSC.TI.COM,  (internet
        address 10.7.0.46) in pub/clue.tar.Z.  Pictures sources are also
        included as  part  of  the  public  distribution of the X Window
        System, Version 11; see directory contrib/tookits/clue/pictures.




RELATED SYSTEMS

        Common Lisp 
       
        Pictures is  written  in  portable  Common  Lisp  and  has  been
        successfully built using  the following  compilers: TI  Explorer
        (Release 6.0, 6.1) and Harlequin LispWorks 2.0.


        CLOS

        This version of Pictures is compatible with TI CLOS (Release 6.0
        or later).


        CLX

        This version of Pictures requires the  CLX R4 or later (see  X11
        R4 distribution, directory lib/CLX).


        CLUE

        This version of Pictures requires CLUE 7.20 or later. 





KNOWN BUGS
        
1.      Extents  are   not   calculated   correctly   for  polygons  and
        filled-polygon-edge methods  when  the  line-width is specified,
        the cap-style  is  :miter  and  one  of  the corners is an acute
        angle.  Part of the corner is  not include in the extent.   If a
        cap-style of :rounded or :beveled is used, there is no problem.

2.      Labels with filled backgrounds leave trash behind after a move
        due to extent calculation flaw. 