

              Common Lisp User Interface Environment (CLUE)
                                                                          
     Copyright (C) 1988, 1989, 1990  Texas Instruments Incorporated


Related Systems

    CLUE relies upon two other systems --- CLX and CLOS.

    CLX,  the  Common  Lisp  X  Interface,  may  be  found  in  the  X11
    distribution from  MIT  (see  lib/CLX/*).   CLUE  requires R3 CLX or
    later.

    CLOS, the Common Lisp Object  System, is a draft  standard extension
    to ANSI  Common  Lisp  for  object-oriented  programming.  Xerox PCL
    (Portable Common  Loops)  is  an  implementation  of  CLOS  which is
    available  publicly   at   no   cost   by   sending   a  request  to
    CommonLoops.pa@xerox.com.  
 


Installation

    Use  the   functions   compile-clue   and   load-clue  in  the  file
    clue/defsystem.l.  For Lisp machine users, this file also contains a
    defsystem definition,  so  that  CLUE  can be built via (make-system
    'clue).

    IMPORTANT NOTE: CLUE  requires CLX  to use  DEFCLASS for  window and
    drawable types.  How you accomplish this depends on which version of
    CLX you are using.

    With R3 CLX, you must build CLX differently by compiling and loading
    clue/clos-patch.l immediately after  the CLX/dependent.l  file.  See
    the  functions  compile-clos-clx   and  load-clos-clx   functions in
    clue/defsystem.l.

    R4 CLX will automatically  use DEFCLASS for  window, etc.  if  it is
    compiled in an environment containing  CLOS.  Thus, with R4  CLX, no
    changes are  typically  needed  before  building CLX.  However, this
    depends upon parts of CLX which may be implementation-dependent (see
    def-clx-class in CLX/depdefs.l).



Examples

    clue/examples/menu.l implements  a  simple  pop-up  menu and several
    related  functions.   See  clue/doc/examples.text  for  a   detailed
    description of these examples.



Documentation

    The directory clue/doc/* contains several documents describing CLUE.

    CLUE.PS, CLUE.TEX

        The CLUE specification which  defines all CLUE  features.  LaTeX
        and PostScript versions are included.

    EXAMPLES.TEXT

        Describes  the   example   in  clue/examples/menu.l.  First-time
        readers should have first read The Quick and Dirty Guide To CLUE
        and should have some familiarity with the CLUE specification.

    RELEASE.<release#>

        Release notes for  the current  and previous  versions of  CLUE.
        The highest <release#> identifies the version of the software in
        these  directories.    The   release   notes  contain  important
        information which must be read before using CLUE.

    TURBO-CLUE.PS, TURBO-CLUE.TEX

        The Quick and Dirty Guide To CLUE.  This tutorial introduces the
        novice CLUE programmer to  the CLUE way  of life with  examples,
        advice, installation notes, and exercises.  LaTeX and PostScript
        versions are included.





